doc: Create doc to build custom tests lib with ANTA (#169)
arista-netdevops-community/anta: docs/advanced_usages/custom-tests.md

# Create your own custom tests

ANTA is not only a CLI with a collection of built-in tests, it is also a framework you can extend by building your own tests library.

> For that, you need to create your own Python package as descirbed in this [hitchhiker's guide](https://the-hitchhikers-guide-to-packaging.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to package Python code. We assume it is well known and we won't focus on this aspect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that, you need to create your own Python package as described in this [hitchhiker's guide](https://the-hitchhikers-guide-to-packaging.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to package Python code. We assume it is well known and we won't focus on this aspect.
```

from anta.tests import anta_test

# Instantiate logger
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

# define a function with at least one decorator to mark as a test
@anta.test
async def verify_dynamic_vlan(device: InventoryDevice,
    result: TestResult, minimum: Optional[int] = None) -> TestResult:

    # Create docstring
    # [...]

    # Create your own logic

    # Check if test option is correct
    if not minimum:
        result.is_skipped("verify_dynamic_vlan was run without minimum value set")
        return result

    # Send command to device
    response = await device.session.cli(command="show vlan", ofmt="json")

    # Optionaly log response for futur debug
    logger.debug(f"query result is: {response}")

    # Do your test: In this example we count number of vlans with field dynamic set to true
    num_dyn_vlan = len([ vlan for vlan,data in response['vlans'].items() if data['dynamic'] is True])
    if num_dyn_vlan >= minimum:
        result.is_success()
    else:
        result.is_failure(f"Device has {num_dyn_vlan} configured, we expect at least {minimum}")

    return result
```

## Python imports

### Mandatory imports

> You should import at least following elements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following elements have to be imported:
```

> - [`InventoryDevice`](../api/inventory.models.md): Where the eAPI session lives. It is used to send commands over HTTP/HTTPS define in your test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`InventoryDevice`](../api/inventory.models.md): Where the eAPI session lives. It is used to send commands defined in your test over HTTP/HTTPS.
```

> - [`TestResult`](../api/result_manager_models.md): Structure used to facilitate test result. It provides helpers like `is_success`, `is_failure`, `is_skipped` and also runs execption managment for you.

Reviewer: Though is the test result really running exception management? the decorator does that no?
```suggestion
- [`TestResult`](../api/result_manager_models.md): Structure used to facilitate test result. It provides helpers like `is_success`, `is_failure`, `is_skipped` and also runs exception management for you.
```

Author: My understanding is we capture exception in this decorator

https://github.com/arista-netdevops-community/anta/blob/7b1640c56cc474595f3b6366ac329fc2f6abb2ac/anta/tests/__init__.py#L44

Reviewer: yes abd si TestResut does not run exception management right?

Author: Oh yes, my bad it is in the wrong place. Fixing it shortly

from anta.decorators import skip_on_platforms

@skip_on_platforms(["cEOSLab", "VEOS-LAB"])
@anta_test
async def verify_unified_forwarding_table_mode(...)
```

### Optional python imports

And finally, you are free to import any other python library you may want to use in your package.

!!! info "logging function"
    It is strongly recommended to import `logging` to help development process and being able to log some outputs usefull for test development.

## Code for a test

### Function definition

The code here can be very simple as well as very complex and will depend of what you expect to do. But in all situation, the same baseline can be leverage:

- Function parameters:
  - `async` in front of the function the function signature defines it as a coroutine and enable parallel execution.
  - `device: InventoryDevice`: Device information (mandatory)
  - `result: TestResult`: A result structure to save test (mandatory)
  - Any option your test may require. In our example, we use `minimum: Optional[int]`

```python
async def verify_dynamic_vlan(
    device: InventoryDevice,
    result: TestResult,
    minimum: Optional[int] = None
) -> TestResult:
```

### Function documentation

> Then, a docstring to document your test. We recommend to use the following syntax rendering for documentation is working pretty well:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend to add a docstring to document your test. As an example, the following syntax rendering for documentation is working pretty well:
```

!!! info "docstring is optional"

>     Of course this section is optional, but we stringly believe in documentation to make the code easier to maintain over the time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Of course this section is optional, but we strongly believe in documentation to make the code easier to maintain over time.
```

```python
"""
< Short description >

< Optional long description >

< A list of inputs >
Args:
    device (InventoryDevice): InventoryDevice instance containing all devices information.
    minimum (int): Minimum number of dynamic vlans expected.

< Description of returned values in TestResult object >
Returns:
    TestResult instance with
    * result = "unset" if the test has not been executed
    * result = "skipped" if the `minimum` parameter is  missing
    * result = "success" if device has more than minimum dynamic vlans
    * result = "failure" otherwise.
    * result = "error" if any exception is caught
"""
```

You can see output using [mkdocstring-python](https://mkdocstrings.github.io/python/) here: [tests.software.md](../api/tests.software.md)

### Check inputs

> If your test has some user's inputs, first you have to validate values are valid. If it is not valid, we expect `TestResult` to return `skipped` with a custom message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your test has some user inputs, you first have to validate the supplied values are valid. If it is not valid, we expect `TestResult` to return `skipped` with a custom message.
```

```python
# Check if test option is correct
if not minimum:
    result.is_skipped("verify_dynamic_vlan was run without minimum value set")
    return result
```

### Implement your logic

Here you implement your own logic. In general, the first action is to send command to devices and capture its response.

> In the example below, we request list of vlans configured on device and then count all the vlans marked as dynamic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, we request the list of vlans configured on device and then count all the vlans marked as dynamic
```

response = await device.session.cli(command="show vlan", ofmt="json")

# Do your test: In this example we count number of vlans with field dynamic set to true
num_dyn_vlan = len([ vlan for vlan,data in response['vlans'].items() if data['dynamic'] is True])
if num_dyn_vlan >= minimum:
    result.is_success()
else:
    result.is_failure(f"Device has {num_dyn_vlan} configured, we expect at least {minimum}")

return result
```

As you can see there is no error management to do in your code. Everything is packaged in `anta_tests` and below is a simple example of error captured with an incorrect JSON key in the code above:

```bash
ERROR    Exception raised for test verify_dynamic_vlan (on device 192.168.0.10) - KeyError ('vlans')
```

!!! info "Get stack trace for debugging"
    If you want to access to the full exception stack, you can run your test with logging level set to `DEBUG`. With ANTA cli, it is available with following option:
    ```bash
    $ anta nrfu text --catalog test_custom.yml --log-level debug
    ```

## Create your catalog

It is very similar to what is documented in [catalog section](../usage-inventory-catalog.md) but you have to use your own package name.

> Let say my custom catalog is `anta_titom73` and my test is configured in `anta_titom73.dc_project`, my test catalog should be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let say the custom catalog is `anta_titom73` and the test is configured in `anta_titom73.dc_project`, the test catalog would look like:
```

```yaml
anta_titom73.dc_project:
  - verify_dynamic_vlan:
      minimum: 1
```
And now you can run your NRFU tests with the CLI:

```bash
anta nrfu text --catalog test_custom.yml
spine01 :: verify_dynamic_vlan :: FAILURE (Device has 0 configured, we expect at least 1)
spine02 :: verify_dynamic_vlan :: FAILURE (Device has 0 configured, we expect at least 1)
leaf01 :: verify_dynamic_vlan :: SUCCESS
leaf02 :: verify_dynamic_vlan :: SUCCESS
leaf03 :: verify_dynamic_vlan :: SUCCESS
leaf04 :: verify_dynamic_vlan :: SUCCESS
```

!!! warning "Install your python package"

>     Anta uses Python path to access to your test. So it is critical to have your tests library installed correctly.

Reviewer: or simply in the PATH?

Author: In general, it is under `$PYTHONPATH` (`sys.path`) that is different than `$PATH`

```bash
python
Python 3.9.9 (main, Jan 26 2022, 14:06:08)
[Clang 12.0.5 (clang-1205.0.22.11)] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import sys
>>> sys.path
['', '/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/versions/3.9.9/lib/python39.zip', '/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/versions/3.9.9/lib/python3.9', '/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/versions/3.9.9/lib/python3.9/lib-dynload', '/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/versions/act-lab/lib/python3.9/site-packages']
>>> exit()

❯ echo $PATH
/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/plugins/pyenv-virtualenv/shims:/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/shims:/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/plugins/pyenv-virtualenv/shims:/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/bin:/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/plugins/pyenv-virtualenv/shims:/Users/tgrimonet/bin:/Users/tgrimonet/.local/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/local/sbin:/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/shims:/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/bin:/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/shims:/Users/tgrimonet/.pyenv/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin:/usr/local/MacGPG2/bin:/Applications/Wireshark.app/Contents/MacOS:/usr/local/go/bin:/Users/tgrimonet/go/bin:/Users/tgrimonet/.fzf/bin
```

Reviewer: yeah sure used the wrong name but I meant maybe you don't need to have your library installed
you can just do

```
PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:<path/to/my/custom/package> anta ...
```

and it will work

Author: Sure any hack is doable here. I prefer to stick to python best practices and anyone can adapt if they want something else :)

Maybe we should add another disclaimer to state we are not dealing with how to make package available in Python (just how to create it) ?

Reviewer: I would argue that making a package available in PYTHONPATH is not a hack as the recommendation to install it is just to achieve this.

Typically making a package installable means having to write some fluffy stuff to make it installable (setup,py, pyproject.toml, ...) which is some useless overhead if you just want to have a collection of custom tests locally whereas just writing a piece of code that is available in your PYTHONPATH to be loaded by anta is more straightforward in my opinion.

I would just state that the module with the custom states must be importable by anta and hence available on the PYTHONPATH

Author: Ok, so I reword a bit in the first section in this commit 7a063242bb57d99deed66453f6381511f6b7bfee
